# LAT-computational-model
# Project deadline: submission by 15 August. So work completed by 7-15 July, for adequate time to write-up thoroughly.
# Project aim: Create a coherent model implementing Zolnik et al (2025)'s "Layer 6b theory of attention", which recapitulates the key elements and predictions of the theory, in a five-stage architecture
# Stages 1-2: rate-based model. Likely to be all that I can achieve in the timeline of my MSc research project. CTC loop is represented by a single variable, $r_i$, collapsing the separate L5<->HoT elements of the loop for simplicity. This aligns with LAT, where L6b pyramidal neurons input into both of these elements, without specifying anything further mechanistically. 
# Stage 1: minimal dynamical-systems model – single loop: neural populations and external inputs, connectivity structure, population rate equations, and synaptic dynamics
# S1 target behaviours x4: 
# S1.1: Triggering attention in a loop - can transient non-pyramidal L6b activation switch a previously inactive loop into the active state? Protocol - low baseline arousal, $A$, lifting to adequate $A$, and briefly applying L6b non-pyramidal, $B_i^{np}$, pulse to loop $r_i$. Desired outcomes - transition of $r_i$ from quiescent to active; it remains active only if L6b pyramidal, $B_i^p$, also becomes engaged
# S1.2: Sustained attention - does an activated loop remain active only while corresponding L6b pyramidal drive remains active? Protocol - active loop $r_i$, with high L6b pyramidal input, $B_i^p$. Both parietofrontal input, $P_i$, and arousal, $A$, also high. Then reduce each of $B_i^p$, $P_i$ and $A$. Desired outcomes - with intact $B_i^p$, $r_i$ activity (CTC loop) stays stable. Once $B_i^p$ falls, CTC depression causes rapid collapse. Likewise when either of $P_i$ or $A$ is reduced below threshold.
# S1.3: Switching off/on – can the model rapidly disengage the loop and then re-engage it? Protocol – activate $r_i$, then withdraw top-down input to $r_i$. Then re-apply the top-down input, and then a triggering $B_i^{np}$ pulse to loop 1. Desired outcome – loop 1 collapses quickly. It then re-activates only once top-down input + triggering pulse are both applied.
# S1.4: State dependence - does arousal gating matter (implementing orexin/arousal system excitability)? Protocol: run same triggering inputs as in S1.1, but under different $A$ levels (low, moderate, high). Desired outcome: under low $A$, top-down input fails to recruit L6b robustly. Under moderate/high $A$, top-down input successfully recruits L6b pyramidal (to trigger) and then non-pyramidal (to sustain), stabilising a loop.
# Stage 2: multiple competing loops - Implementing the model as a ring-network, where each node is a CTC loop, notionly corresponding to a "feature" (red, blue, round, etc), labelled as $r_i$, $r_j$, etc. The ring-network enables mathematical modelling of the circuit as a continuous attractor, where each active loop corresponds to a stable bump of activity, and the network can switch between distinct labeled attractors, for example from $r_i$ to $r_j$. This approach also follows Compte et al (2000)'s landmark prefrontal working memory model. Competition via mutual inhibition (a global inhibitory neuron connected equally to all loops) between loop-level activation variables - leading to 'winner-takes-most' dynamics.
# S2 target behaviour x1: Switching - can the model rapidly disengage one loop and engage another (attractor competition model)? Protocol - activate loop 1, then withdraw top-down input to loop 1, simultaneously providing top-down input and $B_i^{np}$ pulse to loop 2. Desired outcomes - loop 1 collapses quickly and loop 2 rises quickly, with brief overlap (brevity of overlap is critical to LAT's core claim about fast attentional flexibility)
# Stages 3-5: unlikely to get this far, given my project deadline.
# Stage 3: Move from simpler rate-based model, to a spiking-network implementation (single-compartment, leaky integrate-and-fire as simplest implementation) – enables modelling of spike timing, burst-like firing patterns, E/I balance, and fast onset/offset dynamics
# S3 target behaviour x1 (as well as recapitulating all the behaviours seen in the rate-based model, but in the single-compartment SNN model): burst-like firing in the active loop, demonstrated through spike timing, E/I dynamics, and onset/offset sharpness
# Stage 4: Move from single-compartment to two-compartment SNN model (soma/basal vs apical/tuft compartments). Refactor the model so that $r_i$ is separated into its separate $L_i$ (L5 neurons) and $H_i$ (HoT neurons) components. L6b non-pyramidal inputs, $B_i^{np}$, target L5 tuft compartment and can generate a dendritic event that promotes L5 bursting.
# S4 target behaviours x2 (as well as recapitulating all the behaviours seen in the rate-based model, but in the two-compartment SNN model): Model neuromodulation mechanistically (as dynamic variables, versus the rate model's abstract scalar) in both inputs; first, via orexin (arousal-state signalling) and second, via top-down parietofrontal input.
# Stage 5: Adjust parameters to enable gamma-like rhythmic synchronisation to emerge when a loop becomes active (via recurrent E/I cycles) and with activity corresponding to gamma-power
# Overall Success Criteria: the model doesn't prove LAT. But it demonstrates its dynamic plausibility, and mutual compatibility of the theory's claims. Specifically, for positive success: each S1/S2 target behaviour is reproduced within biologically plausible parameter ranges. For negative success: model should fail in predicted ways when components are lesioned — removing L6b pyramidal facilitation collapses sustained attention, removing the L6b non-pyramidal trigger impairs initiation, reducing arousal prevents loop recruitment, removing top-down specificity causes distractibility or diffuse activation
